docs: :memo: add why Markdown post (#167)
seedcase-project/decisions: why-markdown/index.qmd

---
title: "Why Markdown"
description: |
    Markup languages are systems for writing plain text in a structured way that
    dictates how it will be displayed. There are many markup languages and this
    post describes our reasons for using Markdown.
date: "2025-02-28"
categories:
- contribute
- develop
- document
- write
---

## Context and problem statement

> Writing documentation is the core of any human activity, be it a set of

Reviewer: Not sure I agree that writing docs is the *core* of *any* human activity? :) 
```suggestion
Writing documentation is essential to many activities, be it a set of
```

Author: I meant writing generally. Which is a core of human activity, aside from verbal/non-verbal (but still physical) communication :stuck_out_tongue: What about:

```suggestion
Writing, either for communication or making documents, is a fundamental component of any human activity.
```

> instructions, agreements, how-to guides, or even notes. What tools we

Author: ```suggestion
In technical writing, it includes documents like instructions, agreements, how-to guides, or explanations. What tools we
```

use to write documentation can have a significant impact on how we
write, how we collaborate, and how we share information. Following from
our principles, we want open source tools that integrate well with other

> tools we use. These tools are called "markup languages". However, there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tools we use. For writing documentation, the tools we’ll use to write text are called "markup languages". Markup languages are systems for writing plain text in a structured way that
    dictates how it will be displayed. However, there
```
Or something like that.

Author: I don't know why your OS seems to make a special type of `'` that renders differently. So I always have to change it. I think it's treated as a different character so search and replace may not pick it up but I haven't tested it extensively :stuck_out_tongue: Is there a way you can get your OS to use a regular `'`?

are many different markup languages to choose from, and we need to
decide which one to use. The question then becomes:

*Which markup language should we use as the basis for writing all types
of documentation across Seedcase activities?*

## Decision drivers

> Aside from our principles, additional drivers are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from our principles, additional drivers are to choose a markup language that is:
```

-   Familiar to a wide range of people.
-   Popular and well-established.
-   Easy to learn and use.
-   Plain-text based.
-   Able to produce output in multiple formats.

## Considered options

While HTML and LaTeX are popular and well-established markup languages,

> their main disadvantage is that they cannot output to different formats.

Reviewer: Maybe add a parenthesis with examples of what kind of outputs—that we need—that they can’t output?

> their main disadvantage is that they cannot output to different formats.

Author: ```suggestion
their main disadvantage is that they cannot output to different formats. 
For example, they can't convert to each other's formats, from HTML to LaTeX or vice versa.
```

> So we don't consider them. The two main options that fit our drivers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So we don't consider them. The two options that fit our drivers
```

are:

-   [Markdown](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown)
-   [reStructuredText](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ReStructuredText)

### Markdown

Markdown, also commonly referred to as
[CommonMark](https://commonmark.org/), is a lightweight markup language

> with plain text formatting syntax. It is designed so that it can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with plain text formatting syntax. It is designed so it can be
```

> converted to HTML and many other formats using a tool by the same name.

Reviewer: Not sure what is “using a tool by the same name” here. Could you elaborate or rephrase?

> converted to HTML and many other formats using a tool by the same name.

Author: ```suggestion
converted to HTML and many other formats.
```

> Markdown is often used to format readme files, for writing messages in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Markdown is often used to format README files, to write messages in
```

online discussion forums, and to create rich text using a plain text
editor.

::::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   It is by far the most popular markup language used by the widest
    range of people, not just developers.
-   Integrated in nearly all major platforms, like GitHub, WordPress,

>     Stack Exchange, many communication tools like Slack.

Reviewer 2: #
```suggestion
    Stack Exchange, and many communication tools like Slack and Discord.
```

-   Has the massive advantage of having a powerful format converter
    called [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/).
-   Many tools and libraries that use and support it, such as [R
    Markdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/), [Jupyter
    Notebooks](https://jupyter.org/), and [Quarto](https://quarto.org/).
-   It is very easy to use and learn, with a simple syntax that is
    intuitive and easy to remember. Even non-technical people can start
    using it within minutes.
:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   There are many different versions of Markdown, though there are
    strong efforts to standardize it onto CommonMark.
-   Because of it's ease of use, there are some more powerful features
    that are not implemented in the original Markdown syntax, so
    extensions are needed to use features that may be needed in some

>     cases.

Reviewer: Oooo, what kind of features are you referring to here?

>     cases.

Author: ```suggestion
    cases. For instance, they can't handle special formatting around text 
    like a "callout" block often used on websites or in books to draw attention
    to a tip or important piece of information.
```

:::
:::::

### reStructuredText

reStructuredText is a format used for writing technical documentation,
it's popularly is largely due to it being the default format for
documentation in Python projects and packages. Like Markdown, it is

> plain text, fairly simple to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plain text and fairly simple to use.
```

::::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

> -   Because it is the default for Python documentation, it's use and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   Because it is the default for Python documentation, its use and
```

    support is widely available in the Python community.
-   It is more powerful than Markdown, with more features built in

>     mainly because it was designed for technical writing in mind.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    mainly because it was designed with technical writing in mind.
```

:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   Not nearly as widely used as Markdown.
-   Is a bit more difficult to learn and to read, at least relative to
    Markdown.

> -   While Pandoc can convert it to many formats, because Markdown is the
>     core to Pandoc, it can't convert many of its features into the other
>     formats, which minimises it's benefit of being more powerful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Because Markdown is the
    core to Pandoc, Pandoc can't convert many of its features into the other
    formats like RestructuredText.
```
Maybe? Not sure I fully understand the original sentence.

:::
:::::

## Decision outcome

We decided on **Markdown** because it is the most popular and widely
used markup language, it is easy to learn and use, and it has a powerful
format converter in Pandoc. We also use [Quarto](/why-quarto/index.qmd)
for creating websites and other output, which is built on top of
Pandoc's Markdown. Through Quarto we have access to many powerful

> features that make up for Markdown's less powerful features.

Reviewer: Maybe add a “such as” with examples of the features we get access to with Quarto.

> features that make up for Markdown's less powerful features.

Author: ```suggestion
features that make up for Markdown's less powerful features, such as the previously
mentioned "callout" blocks or creating multi-column page layouts.
```

### Consequences

> -   We don't foresee any major consequences to this decision.

Reviewer: Not any consequences of not using reStructuredText for technical/Python documentation for e.g., Sprout?

Author: No, not really. Since Quarto covers all of (plus more) of the features of rST, there is no benefits to using it.
